RFC: Root as a slot (#19068)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/convergence/root-as-slot.md

> ⚠️ That doesn't mean `root` will be available in component's properties interface

What we have right now:

```ts
export type Slots = {
  slot: ObjectShorthandProps<SlotProps>;
};
export interface Props extends ComponentProps<Slots> & React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement> {/* ... */}
export interface State extends ComponentState<Slots> {/* ... */}

// use*State hook
function useState({ slot, ...props }: Props): State {
  // ...
  return {
    ...props,
    slot: resolveShorthand(slot),
  };
}
```

With the modifications:

```ts
export type Slots = {
  root: ObjectShorthandProps<React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement>, HTMLElement>;
  slot: ObjectShorthandProps<SlotProps>;
};
export interface Props extends ComponentProps<Slots> {
  /* ... */
}
export interface State extends ComponentState<Slots> {
  /* ... */
}

// use*State hook
function useState({slot, ...props}: Props): State {
  // ...
  return {
    slot: resolveShorthand(slot)
    root: resolveShorthand(props),
  };
}
```

### Make _slots_ support `as` property (but with restrictions)

> Cancels [Do not support as prop for slots that render native DOM elements] as it already conflicts with [1st rule of ARIA opt-out mechanism]. This would add `as` property for `ObjectShorthandProps` signature for all _slots_.

Reviewer: we haven't had an RFC yet that undoes the result of a previous one... I wonder if we should create a new `discarded` folder for that

Author: It's even trickier than that, because it's not undoing the whole RFC, is undoing one of the alterations proposed by the RFC heheheh

Reviewer 2: Would amending the original RFC and keeping one source of truth make sense? Unsure what the best way forward here is.

Author: Honestly, I kind of have this feeling that we're going to end up with a sea of RFC's and eventually some of them will end up conflicting somewhere.

I'd propose go for the idea of having RFC's as a temporary thing and then having a more robust documentation that can be changed based on the proposals that come from the RFCs

Author: This is definitely something to be discussed!

Reviewer 2: Also thought about that. RFCs could be considered one-shot proposals only and we should port that into doc friendly format, with only how the user should do X

```ts
type ObjectShorthandProps<Props = {}, Ref = unknown, As extends keyof JSX.IntrinsicElements = never> = Props &
  React.RefAttributes<Ref> & {
    as?: As;
    children?: Props['children'] | ShorthandRenderFunction<Props>;
  };
```

All other _Typings_ would be adapted for the changes provided by `ObjectShorthandProps`.

`getSlots` method would stop having special cases for `root` and only a simple `loop` around all provided `slots` would be enough.

```ts
export function getSlots<R extends ObjectShorthandPropsRecord>(
  state: ComponentState<R>,
  slotNames: (keyof R)[] = [],
): {
  slots: Slots<R>;
  slotProps: SlotProps<R>;
} {
  const slots = {} as Slots<R>;
  const slotProps = {} as SlotProps<R>;

  for (const slotName of slotNames) {
    const [slot, props] = getSlot(state, slotName);
    slots[slotName] = slot;
    slotProps[slotName] = props;
  }
  return { slots, slotProps: slotProps };
}
```

## Pros and Cons

### Pros

1. Treating `root` as a simple slot simplifies _Typings_
2. Simplification of _Typings_ also comes with better inference performance
3. References available on every _slot_

> 4. Not using `getNativeElementProps` means possible performance improvement

Reviewer: According to an earlier section, prop filtering would still need to be a thing right ?

```suggestion
4. Not using `getNativeElementProps` for all slots means possible performance improvement
```

Author: prop filtering would still be a thing for the specific case of root slots (not needed, but good to have).

### Cons

1. [Widening Types problem](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️)

> 2. Explicit of _slots_ declaration makes easier for developers to make mistakes

Reviewer: could you give some examples of these mistakes ?

Author: I can only think of two possible common mistakes right now:

- Since `root` becomes a regular slot, it might be possible developers forget to include it in the list of shorthands
- Since typings become a responsibility of the developer, typing errors might be prone, e.g: bad usage of `Partial` or `Required`

I'll add them

The problem can be verified in the next example:

```tsx
type ComponentProps<S extends ObjectShorthandPropsRecord> = Omit<
  { [Key in keyof S]?: ShorthandProps<S[Key]> },
  'root'
> &
  S['root']; // this will make Slots['root'] part of Props

type Slots = {
  root: ObjectShorthandProps<React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement>, HTMLElement>;
};

interface Props extends ComponentProps<Slots> {
  /**
   * Property that can be passed through props
   * but doesn't belong on the element itself,
   * it's only used internally by state
   */
  stateSpecificProperty?: unknown;
}
interface State extends ComponentState<Slots> {
  stateSpecificProperty: unknown;
}

// ...
// use*State hook
return {
  // This should error 🚨 because of stateSpecificProperty,
  // but it doesn't due to type widening
  root: resolveShorthand(props),
};
```

A easy solution would be to use `getNativeElementProps` to filter out properties in this specific case:

```tsx
// use*State hook
return {
  // This filters out stateSpecificProperty ✅

>   root: resolveShorthand(getNativeElementProps(state.components.root, props)),

Reviewer: might be interesting to state smwhere that this specific case, can be tested by conformance tests...it could test that custom props aren't leaking into the root DOM element

Author: Nice, I'll add that session! and IMO that's the way to go with this, instead of relying on prop filtering we should ensure this by conformance and linting (perhaps)

# RFC: root as a slot

---

_@bsunderhus_

## Summary

This RFC proposes to treat `root` as a _slot_ to simplify signature, improve `Typings` and avoid conflicts between `root` and other _slots_ signatures.

Main changes would be:

1. `root` becomes a regular slot on component state
2. Support references on every _slot_

> 3. Supports Custom Elements on every _slot_

Author: Yes. any React element, I better change that phrase

4. Allows a restricted `as` prop on every slot

> 5. stops using `getNativeElementProps` on every slot

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Stops using `getNativeElementProps` on every slot, will be used only for `root`
```

I think that this is more realistic 🙄

## Problem statement

There are disparities in how `root` is treated compared to _slots_. Some discussions have popped up due to these divergences between _slots_ and `root`:

1. [Do not support as prop for slots that render native DOM elements] conflicts with [1st rule of ARIA opt-out mechanism]
2. Support for Custom Elements on _slots_ but not for _root_
3. Right now `Typings` for `root` aren't available as there's no way to split `root` from internal state.
4. There's no possible way of passing refs to slots but `root` does
5. [Primary slot]

Major differences between `root` (shown below as 🌿) and _slots_ (shown below as 🎰):

1. References 🌿
2. Custom Elements as base element 🎰
3. `as` prop 🌿
4. Well defined Types 🎰

## Detailed Design or Proposal

For the user of the component perspective there will be no changes in the signature.

### Converge `root` to a _slot_

This RFC proposes to treat `root` as a _slot_.

Treating `root` as a slot means having to declare `root` _Typings_ together with other _slots_. This will impact in a components state signature, where `root` will have to be declared.

> > ⚠️ That doesn't mean `root` will be available in component's properties interface

Reviewer 4: Could you clarify this about root not being in the properties interface? It looks like `root` is in the `Slots` type in the example below. Is there some magic happening in the `ComponentProps<Slots>` helper to remove `root`?

Reviewer 4: Or, if `root` is a prop, what happens if I write:
```jsx
<Component id="foo" root={{ id: "bar" }} />
```

Author: Yes, it's `ComponentProps` responsibility to remove `root` from `Slots` and flatten it in `Props` itself.

Author: > Or, if `root` is a prop, what happens if I write:
> 
> ```js
> <Component id="foo" root={{ id: "bar" }} />
> ```

You can't do that, since `root` is not available as a property

What we have right now:

```ts
export type Slots = {
  slot: ObjectShorthandProps<SlotProps>;
};
export interface Props extends ComponentProps<Slots> & React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement> {/* ... */}
export interface State extends ComponentState<Slots> {/* ... */}

// use*State hook
function useState({ slot, ...props }: Props): State {
  // ...
  return {
    ...props,
    slot: resolveShorthand(slot),
  };
}
```

With the modifications:

```ts
export type Slots = {
  root: ObjectShorthandProps<React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement>, HTMLElement>;
  slot: ObjectShorthandProps<SlotProps>;
};
export interface Props extends ComponentProps<Slots> {
  /* ... */
}
export interface State extends ComponentState<Slots> {
  /* ... */
}

// use*State hook
function useState({slot, ...props}: Props): State {
  // ...
  return {
    slot: resolveShorthand(slot)

>     root: resolveShorthand(props),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    root: resolveRoot(props),
```

or

```suggestion
    root: getNativeElementProps(props),
```

As we discussed in offline, we cannot use `resolveShorthand()` for slot as it accepts component's props.

---

We need to have `props` filtering to avoid leaking props, for example:

```tsx
<SampleComponent size="large" sampleSlot={{ role: 'none' }} />
// 🔽
const state = { root: resolveShorthand({ size: 'large', sampleSlot: { role: 'none' } }) }
// state.root will contain `sampleSlot` & `size` 💣
// they will be spreaded on DOM
```

---

Overall, there is no sense to call `resolveShorthand()` on `props` as `props` are already an object 🤨 `resolveRoot()` might be a better solution as we need to return specific interface:

```tsx
resolveShorthand(props /* ComponentProps */) // returns "ObjectShorthandProps<??>
```

Author: I don't know if `resolveRoot` is a good name, perhaps the best idea would be to explicitly use the native props filtering, but still, this is debatable

>     root: getNativeElementProps('div', props),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    root: getNativeElementProps(props.as || 'div', props),
```

```suggestion
    root: getNativeElementProps(state.components.root, props),
```

_nit_: this probably should something like this to handle `as` prop

  };
}
```

> ### Make _slots_ support `as` property (but with restrictions)

Reviewer 4: If 'as' is added per-slot, then is `components` a duplicate way of specifying the component type? E.g. are these two the same thing?
```jsx
<Component label={{ as: 'span', children: 'foo' }} />
<Component components={{ label: 'span' }} label="foo" /> 
```

Reviewer 4: I've been thinking about an alternative that would allow an optional tuple of [component, shorthandProps] for a slot, instead of the `components` prop. E.g., the equivalent to above would be:
```tsx
<Component label={[ 'span', 'foo' ]} />
```
The benefit being that it still supports forwarding the `as` prop to a custom component:
```tsx
<Component label={[ MyLabelWithAsProp, { as: 'span', children: 'foo' } ]} />
```

I wonder if that would be a possible alternative to supporting `as` natively in all slots?

Author: That would conflict with possible future RFC ideas like the one proposed by @smhigley https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/19266

Author: > If 'as' is added per-slot, then is `components` a duplicate way of specifying the component type? E.g. are these two the same thing?
> 
> ```js
> <Component label={{ as: 'span', children: 'foo' }} />
> <Component components={{ label: 'span' }} label="foo" /> 
> ```

well, it would be... but `components` is also not available in the properties, it's state only

Author: It's also good to make it clear the main difference between `as` and `component` is what they support. `as` is limited to be a mechanism for semantic elements (change `button` to `div`), while `component` doesn't have that limitation, and that's the main reason why `as` is explicit and `components` isn't. The repercussion of making `components` somehow so accessible by the user would lean towards some undesired unmapped behaviors

Reviewer 4: > That would conflict with possible future RFC ideas like the one proposed by @smhigley #19266

My idea was actually an attempt to solve a problem in that RFC--that you couldn't specify a different component per-slot--and would end up working nicely with her proposal. That said, Shift had some detailed comments on her RFC that might change the direction there (and obviate the problem I was trying to solve).

> well, it would be... but `components` is also not available in the properties, it's state only

Ah, I misunderstood from #18642 -- I thought `components` was being exposed as a prop. Thanks for clarifying 👍

Cancels [Do not support as prop for slots that render native DOM elements] as it already conflicts with [1st rule of ARIA opt-out mechanism]. This would add `as` property for `ObjectShorthandProps` signature for all _slots_.

> To ensure `as` property is used for opt-out mechanism only native elements will be supported. _Typings_ must be used to ensure which native elements are supported.

Author: this RFC main purpose is to make `root` as close to a simple _slot_ as possible, so this will be applied to all _slots_

> To ensure `as` property is used for opt-out mechanism only native elements will be supported. _Typings_ must be used to ensure which native elements are supported.

Reviewer 2: Strictly out of curiosity, this would mean no custom components can be used in slots but instead only the semantic ones, correct?
While I do agree with it, was this behavior previously agreed on already or are we proposing that here?
If so, I would make that clearer in the RFC. If not, disregard this completely 😁

> To ensure `as` property is used for opt-out mechanism only native elements will be supported. _Typings_ must be used to ensure which native elements are supported.

Author: Good question @andrefcdias, and this is one more reason for why having RFC as documentations is confusing IMHO, this behavior has been decided in a [previous RFC](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/rfcs/convergence/as-prop.md)

`ObjectShorthandProps` should be a model that _shorthand_ properties should extend from, and to ensure `as` property is only provided in cases that opt-out mechanism is required the `never` type should be used to disable `as` property on default cases.

```ts
type ObjectShorthandProps<Props = {}, Ref = unknown, As extends keyof JSX.IntrinsicElements = never> = Props &
  React.RefAttributes<Ref> & {
    as?: As;
    children?: Props['children'] | ShorthandRenderFunction<Props>;
  };
```

The case for `useARIAButton` is a good example of using this signature:

```ts

> export type ARIAButtonProps =

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
export type ARIAButtonShorthandProps =
```
As everything below is `ObjectShorthandProps`, IMO it should contain `Shorthand` in the name.

  | ObjectShorthandProps<JSX.IntrinsicElements['button'], HTMLButtonElement, /*as*/ 'button'>
  | ObjectShorthandProps<JSX.IntrinsicElements['div'], HTMLDivElement, /*as*/ 'div'>
  | ObjectShorthandProps<JSX.IntrinsicElements['span'], HTMLSpanElement, /*as*/ 'span'>

>   | ObjectShorthandProps<JSX.IntrinsicElements['a'], HTMLAnchorElement, /*as*/ 'a'>;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  | ObjectShorthandProps<JSX.IntrinsicElements['a'], HTMLAnchorElement, /*as*/ 'a'>
  | ObjectShorthandProps<JSX.IntrinsicElements['button'], HTMLButtonElement>;
```

Technically, it should contain a default case, otherwise it will be always required to define `as`:

```tsx
<>
  {/* "as" is required by typings, but I want to define only "onClick" 💣 */}
  <SampleComponent sampleSlot={{ as: "button", onClick: () => {} }} />
</>
```

Author: That's not true, by default the default case in this implementation would be the intersection between each specific case. so most of the properties will be available without defining `as`

```

`ARIAButtonProps` is a union between types from `button`, `div`, `span` and `anchor` native elements.

> ⚠️ using union types for declaring properties is not perfect https://catchts.com/unions

### No reason for `getNativeElementProps`

The problem reported on [Widening Types](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️), makes this a little bit controversial.

> Although types should be enough to ensure that only supported properties will be passed to a _slot_, [Widening Types problem](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️) make it not so much true for `root` at least. Besides `root` is safe to say that `getNativeelementProps` is not necessary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although types should be enough to ensure that only supported properties will be passed to a _slot_, [Widening Types problem](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️) make it not so much true for `root` at least. Besides `root` is safe to say that `getNativeElementProps` is not necessary.
```

> Although types should be enough to ensure that only supported properties will be passed to a _slot_, [Widening Types problem](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️) make it not so much true for `root` at least. Besides `root` is safe to say that `getNativeElementProps` is not necessary.

Reviewer 5: Some wording suggestions to hopefully make this a little clearer
```suggestion
Although types should be enough to ensure that only supported properties will be passed to a _slot_, this is less true for `root` at least due to the [Widening Types problem](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️). Aside from `root`, it's safe to say that `getNativeElementProps` is not necessary.
```

### Add references to all _slots_

> Right now _ref_ is not supported on _Typings_ for _slots_. This proposes that _ref_ should be part of the internal interface of `ObjectShorthandProps` to allow access of references to internal slots of a given component.

Reviewer 3: As a slot can be custom component, this should depend on a component definition actually: functional components don't have refs, class components have refs to class instances. But as we have `Ref` as a param in generic I don't see issues with it.

Author: No issues at all, simply pass ref as never for this case and it'll be enough

> Right now _ref_ is not supported on _Typings_ for _slots_. This proposes that _ref_ should be part of the internal interface of `ObjectShorthandProps` to allow access of references to internal slots of a given component.

Reviewer 5: Nit, I think it would be good to use code formatting (backticks) for things like `ref` that match up to actual names in code.
```suggestion
Right now `ref` is not supported on _Typings_ for _slots_. This proposes that `ref` should be part of the internal interface of `ObjectShorthandProps` to allow access of references to internal slots of a given component.
```

```ts
type ObjectShorthandProps<Props = {}, Ref = unknown, As extends keyof JSX.IntrinsicElements = never> = Props &
  React.RefAttributes<Ref> & {
    as?: As;
    children?: Props['children'] | ShorthandRenderFunction<Props>;
  };
```

## Implementation Details

Changes are located mostly on `react-utilities/compose` methods and _Typings_.

`ObjectShorthandProps` will have to support `as` and `ref` properties with Generics:

```ts
type ObjectShorthandProps<Props = {}, Ref = unknown, As extends keyof JSX.IntrinsicElements = never> = Props &
  React.RefAttributes<Ref> & {
    as?: As;
    children?: Props['children'] | ShorthandRenderFunction<Props>;
  };
```

All other _Typings_ would be adapted for the changes provided by `ObjectShorthandProps`.

> `getSlots` method would stop having special cases for `root` and only a simple `loop` around all provided `slots` would be enough.

Reviewer 5: Related nit, probably best to avoid backticks for things that aren't variable/function/type names.
```suggestion
`getSlots` method would stop having special cases for `root` and only a simple loop around all provided `slots` would be enough.
```

```ts
export function getSlots<R extends ObjectShorthandPropsRecord>(
  state: ComponentState<R>,
  slotNames: (keyof R)[] = [],
): {
  slots: Slots<R>;
  slotProps: SlotProps<R>;
} {
  const slots = {} as Slots<R>;
  const slotProps = {} as SlotProps<R>;

  for (const slotName of slotNames) {
    const [slot, props] = getSlot(state, slotName);
    slots[slotName] = slot;
    slotProps[slotName] = props;
  }
  return { slots, slotProps: slotProps };
}
```

## Pros and Cons

### Pros

1. Treating `root` as a simple slot simplifies _Typings_
2. Simplification of _Typings_ also comes with better inference performance
3. References available on every _slot_
4. Not using `getNativeElementProps` for all slots means possible performance improvement

### Cons

1. [Widening Types problem](#⚠️-Widening-types-problem-⚠️)
2. Explicit _slots_ declaration makes easier for developers to make mistakes

> #### Possible mistakes

Reviewer 5: I think both of these could be mitigated easily enough by good documentation and possibly also lint rules or danger checks.

Author: I'll add that also!

Author: I guess after this PR implementation I'll open a new one for implementing this 👍🏼 on the future

The problem can be verified in the next example:

```tsx
type ComponentProps<S extends ObjectShorthandPropsRecord> = Omit<
  { [Key in keyof S]?: ShorthandProps<S[Key]> },
  'root'
> &
  S['root']; // this will make Slots['root'] part of Props

type Slots = {
  root: ObjectShorthandProps<React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement>, HTMLElement>;
};

interface Props extends ComponentProps<Slots> {
  /**
   * Property that can be passed through props
   * but doesn't belong on the element itself,
   * it's only used internally by state
   */
  stateSpecificProperty?: unknown;
}
interface State extends ComponentState<Slots> {
  stateSpecificProperty: unknown;
}

// ...
// use*State hook
return {
  // This should error 🚨 because of stateSpecificProperty,
  // but it doesn't due to type widening
  root: resolveShorthand(props),
};
```

A easy solution would be to use `getNativeElementProps` to filter out properties in this specific case:

```tsx
// use*State hook
return {
  // This filters out stateSpecificProperty ✅

>   root: resolveShorthand(getNativeElementProps(state.components.root, props)),
> };

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  root: getNativeElementProps(state.components.root, props),
};
```

Should we remove `resolveShorthand()` call there?
